A Darker Prometheus (and the Conflict between Individuals and Nature)
Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein and Lord Byron’s “Prometheus” both deal with the idea of creators and how their creations affect their lives. In Frankenstein, a Genevese scientist by the name of Victor Frankenstein animates a monster using dead flesh, chemicals, and electricity. However, shocked by the unexpected combination of expectation, hideousness, and beauty, he flees from the scene of the creation believing that the monster wishes to harm him. Victor further reinforces his belief when his cousin is murdered, and Victor notices his creation lurking in the forest near his home. The tension between Victor and the monster continues to escalate, and, when Victor decides never to forgive the monster and accept him for who he is, the monster swears that he will take revenge and isolate Victor in the same way that he was left alone by Victor. On the other hand, Lord Byron’s poem deals solely with the consequences Prometheus faces for creating and aiding man. In “Prometheus,” the narrator lists off the punishments Prometheus received, asking Prometheus whether he believes that he deserved them. The poem continues with the list in the second stanza, before finally concluding in the third stanza by praising Prometheus for his sacrifices for man. The difference in the ideas explored by each piece helps to underscore an important distinction between Victor and Prometheus: While Prometheus cares for his creation, Victor only fears and mistrusts the monster he creates. This difference between them highlights the character difference between them in that Victor is self-centered and focused on himself while Prometheus is more kind and generous.
Victor and Prometheus parallel each other in many ways: Both create unique beings, and both suffer great losses as a result. In Frankenstein, Victor “infuses life into an inanimate body”, creating creature with a “work of muscles and arteries beneath” his “yellow skin”, “lustrous black” hair, and “teeth of a pearly whiteness” (Shelley 35). However, he describes his creation as a catastrophe, “these luxuriances” forming “a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes, … his shrivelled complexion, and straight black lips” (35). Shocked by how close the monster is to being human while simultaneously being so ugly and unsettling, Victor abandons the monster and flees from his lab. When Victor next meets the monster, Victor’s brother William has been murdered, and William’s caretaker Justine has been found guilty of the crime. However, Victor believes that the murderer was not Justine but actually the monster. Upon meeting each other, Victor insists that he will fight the monster. However, the monster asks for forgiveness, claiming that “every where [he] sees bliss, from which [he] alone is irrevocably excluded”, and that “[he] was benevolent and good; misery made [him] a fiend” (68). The monster continues to talk, and he confesses to murdering William and framing Justine with the locket. Listening to the story, Victor swears that he will never friend the monster and that they are enemies. In return, the monster vows to “become the scourge of [humans], and the author of [Victor’s] own speedy ruin” (69). The intense hatred the monster reveals here in the foreshadowing of his later actions against Victor illustrate the severe losses Victor will suffer as a result of him creating the monster. Similarly, the Titan Prometheus creates humans, a unique being, and he suffers a great deal as a result. In “Prometheus,” Lord Byron outlines the suffering Prometheus undergoes as a result. As a punishment for creating humans, Prometheus is condemned to an “intense” “silent suffering” (Byron 6), chained to a rock as vultures eat out his liver. The poem also paints the image of eternal torture by referring to Prometheus’s torture as “wretched gift Eternity” as “Heaven … refus'd [Prometheus] even the boon to die” (23). In all, both Victor and Prometheus create creations, and both face extreme consequences as a result.
While both Victor and Prometheus suffer as a result of their creations, Prometheus’s sacrifices for his creation as opposed to Victor’s hatred and fear of the monster result in Prometheus’s creation looking up to him as a god and a savior, while Victor’s creation destroys his life and targets everyone he loves. In the final stanza of “Prometheus,” the narrator praises Prometheus for his sacrifices for humans by saying that “[Prometheus’s] Godlike crime was to be kind” (35) and referring to him as “a symbol and a sign / To Mortals of their fate and force” (45-46). This praise in the poem highlights Prometheus’s noble sacrifice in bringing fire to humans, and indicates that the torture he faces as a consequence illustrates Prometheus’s nobility and kindness. On the other hand, in Frankenstein, Victor fears his creation, and, when he refuses to help the monster, the monster swears to destroy Victor’s life. In the novel, Victor’s actions towards the monster and his beliefs which he vocalizes in the narration indicate that Victor is self-centered, egotistical, and displays none of the characteristics portrayed by Prometheus. Upon creating the monster, Victor deserts the monster instead of offering care and protection in a manner similar to Prometheus’s actions to help humans. Also, later, when the monster kills William and frames Justine, instead of supporting his family and Justine, Victor becomes depressed and blames himself for the deaths. During his narration, he even states “Despair! Who dared talk of that? That poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the dreary boundary between life and death, felt not as I did, such deep and bitter agony” (59). At this point, even when Justine has been found guilty and is sentenced to be executed, Victor still feels sorry for himself and his misfortune in creating the monster. Thus, the difference in attitude and care for their creations indicate the character difference between Victor and Prometheus in that Victor is self-centered and focused on himself while Prometheus is more kind and generous.
Mary Shelley appears to approach the creation of Frankenstein as a dark variation of Prometheus’s story, and the contrast in Frankenstein indicates. While Prometheus aids humans and sacrifices to assist them, Victor does the exact opposite, and he tries everything he can to stop his creation. In “Prometheus,” Prometheus is punished for disobeying “the inexorable Heaven, / And the deaf tyranny of Fate” (Byron 18-19). Prometheus is said to have rebelled against the command of the Olympian gods, who punish him for his betrayal. On the other hand, Victor violates nature herself in his attempt to create life. During his narration, Victor asks, “Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil, as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave, or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay?” (Shelley 33). With this question and word choice, Victor reveals that his work is destructive and interferes with the work of nature. This is further shown with another statement Victor makes later in his narration, when he says that he “collected bones from charnel houses; and disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human frame” (34). With this statement, Victor further demonstrates that his work and his attempts to create a living being violate natural order and interfere with nature and her processes for creation and destruction. Thus, the difference in magnitude between the offenses done by Prometheus and Victor, alongside their actions and responses to their creations, indicates that Victor and Frankenstein were created as a dark parallel to Prometheus and his myth.
Mary Shelley’s possible intention in creating the parallel of darkness between Prometheus and Victor could be to reveal deeper, possible contradiction between the Romantic ideals of individualism and nature. During his narration to Walton, Victor says that “winter, spring, and summer, passed away during mt labours; but [he] did not watch the blossom of the expanding leaves—sights which before always yielded [him] supreme delight, so deeply was [he] engrossed in [his] occupation” (35). Victor’s abandonment of nature indicates that he has chosen his scientific experiment over the beauty and power of nature. Also, Shelley uses Victor’s college professors to indicate that scientists “penetrate into the recesses of nature, and shew how she works in her hiding places” (29). Shelley’s powerful imagery and word choice indicates her belief that the work of scientists violates nature and is dangerous. This focus on nature thus conflicts with the Romantic individualism, which manifests itself as Victor. In Frankenstein, the role of Victor as both the individual and a destroyer of natural beauty and power highlights the tension between the two Romantic ideas.